---
title: "Chapter 46 - Solid Waste"
source: "Town of China Grove Code of Ordinances"
---

# CHAPTER 46. SOLID WASTE

**State law references—** City may regulate illegal disposal of solid waste, littering, G.S. 160A-185; authority to regulate disposal of trash and garbage within municipal limits, G.S. 160A-303.1; municipal power to require use of solid waste services and to regulate accordingly, G.S. 160A-317(b); requirements for municipal solid waste landfill facilities, 15A N.C. Admin. Code 13B.1601 et seq.

### Sec. 46-1. Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

*Approved container* means a roll-out cart provided by garbage collection company.

*Ashes* means remains from materials used for the creation and continuation of a fire.

*Bag* means a plastic sack designed to store and enclose solid waste with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. Total weight of a bag with contents shall not exceed 40 pounds.

*Bulky waste* means large items such as furniture, large auto parts, and other oversize wastes whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal solid waste collection, processing, or disposal methods.

*Construction and demolition waste* means waste resulting solely from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on buildings, or other structures, or used asphalt, asphalt mixed with dirt, sand, gravel, rock, concrete or similar materials, but not inert debris, landclearing debris, or yard debris.

*Customers* means residential units and light commercial entities, located within the service area, identified by the town or by the company and approved by the town as being eligible for and in need of the services provided by the company under this contract.

*Hazardous waste* means any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate agency of the federal or state government to be hazardous, toxic, radioactive, volatile, corrosive, flammable, explosive, biomedical, infectious, and/or biohazardous, as those terms are defined by or pursuant to federal or state law or regulations.

*Industrial waste* means sold waste generated by industrial processes and manufacturing.

*Light commercial entity* means a business within the service area that is approved by the town for the receipt of services hereunder and that generates a volume of municipal solid waste that can be adequately accommodated by one or more roll-out carts.

*Medical waste* means any solid waste which is generated in the diagnosis, treatment, or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in production or testing of biologicals, but does not include any hazardous waste or those substances excluded from the definition of solid waste.

*Municipal solid waste* means solid waste resulting from the operation of residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional establishments that would normally be collected, processed and disposed of through a public or private solid waste management service. Municipal solid waste never includes hazardous waste, special waste, medical waste, or solid waste from mining or agricultural operations.

*Persons for hire* means any corporation, firm, partnership, association or organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual person, who grants to another either the enjoyment of a thing or the use of the labor and industry, either of himself or his designee, during a certain time, for a stipulated compensation.

*Refuse* means all nonputrescible waste.

*Residential unit* means a dwelling within the service area as hereinafter defined, occupied by a person or group of persons. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when water services, either public or private, are being supplied thereto. Each unit of an apartment or condominium dwelling consisting of four or fewer living units, whether single or multilevel construction, shall be treated as a residential unit.

*Roll-out cart* means a company-owned receptacle with two wheels and a properly designed axle and fittings, and a top lid that is to remain closed except when loading waste, with a body consisting of approximately 90 to 96 gallons in capacity, constructed of heavy duty plastic and having the strength to store normal household solid waste and equipped with proper attachments for hydraulic loading into the company's collection vehicle.

*Rubbish* or *trash* means all waste wood, wood products (but not yard waste), chips, shavings, sawdust, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or wrapping crockery and glass, cinders, glass, and mineral or metallic substances.

*Sanitary landfill* means a facility for disposal of solid waste on land in a sanitary manner in accordance with the rules, regulations, laws and ordinances of the state and federal regulations.

*Service area* means the incorporated limits of the town.

*Solid waste* means all solid and semi-solid garbage, refuse, and rubbish/trash, but never hazardous waste or special waste, solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage, solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows, industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Acts, as amended (86 Stat. 880), or source, special nuclear, or by-product materials, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923).

*Special waste* means solid waste that can require special handling and management, including white goods, whole tires, used motor oil, lead-acid batteries and medical wastes. Also, all treated/decharacterized (formerly hazardous) wastes, polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) wastes, industrial process wastes, asbestos containing material, chemical containing equipment, demolition wastes, incinerator ash, medical wastes, off-spec chemicals, sludges, spill-cleanup wastes, underground storage tank (UST) soils, and wastes from service industries.

*White goods* means refrigerators, stoves and ranges, water heaters, freezers, swing sets, bicycles (without tires) scrap metal, copper, and other similar domestic and commercial large appliances.

*Yard waste* means any and all vegetative matter resulting from landscaping, or yard maintenance, such as shrubs, bushes, and garden clippings.
(Ord. of 5-2-2006(3), § 2; Ord. No. 2017-16, 11-7-2017)

### Sec. 46-2. Garbage collection and recycling.

(a) *Garbage and recycling contract.* The town will provide curbside collection of household solid waste and recycling materials through a contract with a private solid waste collection company. The town will periodically solicit bids for providing these services.

(b) *Roll-out containers.*

(1) Each customer will be furnished one roll-out container by the town or their solid waste collection contractor. Additional containers may be obtained from the town or its contractor if needed.

(2) All solid waste must be placed inside the roll-out container.

(c) *Location of containers.*

(1) An approved containers shall be placed in a location that is readily accessible to the company and its collection equipment, not to exceed three feet from the curb or edge of the traveled portion of the street or road and not to be located in a manner that will block the driveway or mailbox or otherwise inhibit proper servicing.

(2) The town will aid the company in resolving problems of waste location. In rural areas, if applicable, pickups will be limited to mailbox locations, and private roads will not be traveled.

(d) *Storage and disposal.* All garbage and recycling bins shall be placed on the street no earlier than dusk on the evening prior to the scheduled collection and no later than 7:00 a.m. on collection days. The owner or occupant of the premises shall remove containers from the street by midnight on the day of collection. No containers of any type are to be placed kept or left on the street for any purposes on Saturday and Sunday.

(e) *Notification of collection schedule.* The town will notify customers of changes; either temporary or permanent; to the garbage and recycling collection schedule.

(f) *Frequency of collection.* All garbage and recycling will be collected at least one time per calendar week. In the event of inclement weather, the collection of garbage and recyclables will be scheduled as soon as possible.
(Ord. of 5-2-2006(3), § 3)

### Sec. 46-3. Leaf collection.

(a) *Collection schedule.*

(1) The method for collecting leaves within the corporate limits of the town will be determined by the date, and whether that date is considered to be "in season" or "out of season." The dates for in season and out of season are as follows:

a. In season: October 1 through January 31.

b. Out of season: February 1 through September 30.

(2) In season, the town will run predetermined routes on a regular basis using vacuum machines to collect leaves.

(3) Out of season, the town will only collect leaves that are bagged in 35-gallon or smaller bags. These will be collected on a call in basis through the issuance of a work order.

(4) Dependent upon the weather, the town manager or his designee may determine if the regular routes will be run, or if leaves will be collected on a call in basis.

(b) *Location of leaves.* Leaves must be placed behind the sidewalk or curb so as to not impede storm water drainage, pedestrian traffic, or vehicular traffic.

(c) *General disposal.* Leaves must be free of all limbs, brick, rock, etc. If leaves are commingled with limbs, brick, rock, or other materials, then the town may refuse to collect the debris.
(Ord. of 5-2-2006(3), § 4)

### Sec. 46-4. Tree limbs and yard trimmings.

(a) *Collection schedule.* The method for collecting tree limbs and yard trimmings within the corporate limits of the town will be on a call basis only. This will be handled through the issuance of a work order.

(b) *Location of tree limbs/yard trimmings.* Tree limbs and yard trimmings must be placed behind the sidewalk or curb and out of the public right-of-way so as to not impede stormwater drainage, pedestrian traffic, or vehicular traffic. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property to cause or allow such debris to be placed in the public right-of-way, or to allow such debris to remain after it has been ordered removed.

(c) *General disposal.* In order for the town to properly remove limbs from the customer's property, the resident must ensure that all of the tree limbs meet the following criteria:

(1) Limbs shall not be longer than six feet in length.

(2) Limbs shall not be larger than six inches in diameter.

(3) Limbs shall be stacked, but end facing the street, on or near curb for easy access to collection truck.

(4) Small limbs and twigs shall be bundled and tied or place in bags or other containers. Their weight shall not to exceed 50 pounds.

(5) Yard trimmings shall be placed in bags or other containers. Their weight shall not exceed 50 pounds.

(d) *Items not collected.*

(1) The town will not pick up debris that is the result of cropping or topping of trees, the felling of trees, tree stumps, or the clearing of undeveloped property. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property to cause or allow debris that is the result of cropping or topping of trees, the felling of trees, tree stumps, or the clearing of undeveloped property to be placed in the public right-of-way or curbside, or to allow such debris to remain after it has been ordered removed.

(2) The town will not pick up debris from trees that was removed by contractors or persons for hire. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property to cause or allow debris resulting from work conducted by hired labor to be placed in the public right-of-way or curbside, or allow such debris to remain after it has been ordered removed.
(Ord. of 5-2-2006(3), § 5; Ord. No. 2017-16, 11-7-2017)

### Sec. 46-5. Other debris and materials.

(a) *Collection schedule.* The method for collecting debris and other materials within the corporate limits of the town will be on a call basis only. This will be handled through the issuance of a work order.

(b) *Location of materials and debris.* Materials and debris must be placed behind the sidewalk or curb so as to not impede storm water drainage, pedestrian traffic, or vehicular traffic.

(c) *General disposal.* All items must have the ability to be easily removed by hand or placed within a container. Rocks, dirt, brick, gravel, or other similar materials shall be placed in bags or other containers so that their weight shall not exceed 50 pounds.

(d) *Collectible items.* The town will collect the following items: white goods (appliances), tires without rims, toys, lawn mowers, grills, deck and yard furniture, household furniture, construction debris, and other nonhazardous disposable items that do not exceed one cubic yard.

(e) *Noncollectible items.* The town will not collect the following items: drums or barrels of any size, pressurized containers, liquids of any type, hazardous materials, batteries, roofing materials, items with sharp or jagged points or edges, or any other materials that may be considered harmful or hazardous to humans, animals, or the environment.
(Ord. of 5-2-2006(3), § 6)

### Sec. 46-6. Disposal of waste from outside corporate limits.

The disposal of solid waste within the corporate limits of the town from areas outside of the boundaries of the town is prohibited.
(Ord. of 5-2-2006(3), § 7)

### Sec. 46-7. Penalty.

Customers found in violation of this chapter will, for the first violation, receive a warning stipulating the nature of the violation. Second and future violations will result in a $50.00 citation. Each occurrence and/or each day's continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense. Failure to pay this citation may result in a civil action taken by the town towards the offending customer.
(Ord. of 5-2-2006(3), § 8; Ord. No. 2017-16, 11-7-2017)
