# Article 12: Minimum Housing Codes

## 160D-1201: Authorization

**(a) Dwellings.** The governing board of any local government may adopt and enforce a minimum housing code, as authorized herein, within its planning and development regulation jurisdiction. It is hereby found and declared that the existence of dwellings within the planning and development regulation jurisdiction of any local government that are unfit for human habitation, due to dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; lack of ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or due to other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, and thus dangerous and detrimental to the health, safety, and morals, and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the local government, authorizes the local government to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish such dwellings in accordance with the procedures which are set forth in this Article.

**(b) Abandoned Structures.** Any local government may exercise the powers authorized under this Article for dwellings to address abandoned structures that are found to be a health or safety hazard, following the same procedures prescribed for dwellings that are unfit for human habitation.

## 160D-1202: Definitions

As used in this Article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

(1) Owner. - The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.

(2) Parties in interest. - All individuals, associations, and corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof.

(3) Public authority. - Any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the local government or the State relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning dwellings in the local government's planning and development regulation jurisdiction.

(4) Public officer. - The officer or officers who are authorized by ordinances adopted hereunder to exercise the powers prescribed by the ordinances and by this Article.

## 160D-1203: Ordinance Authorized; Order of Public Officer

Whenever the governing board of any local government finds that there exist in the local government's planning and development regulation jurisdiction conditions of the character described in G.S. 160D-1201 and that such conditions can be effectively remedied through the exercise of the powers vested in the local government by this Article, the governing board may adopt ordinances relating to dwellings within such planning and development regulation jurisdiction that are unfit for human habitation. Such ordinances shall include the following provisions:

**(1)** That a public officer be designated or appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by the ordinances.

**(2)** That whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the local government's planning and development regulation jurisdiction charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his or her own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the public officer shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect. The complaint shall contain a notice that an administrative hearing will be held before the public officer (or his or her designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not less than 10 nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity are not controlling in hearings before the public officer.

**(3)** That if, after notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order:

a. If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling (the ordinance of the local government may fix a certain percentage of the value as being reasonable for this purpose), requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation. With respect to an order requiring the owner to vacate and close a dwelling, the order may not require the owner to vacate and close the dwelling unless the public officer finds that the occupancy of the dwelling significantly endangers the occupant's risk of substantial bodily harm, considering the nature and scope of repairs required, the current condition of the dwelling and the expected length of time to complete repairs, and the presence of minor children or persons with disabilities in the dwelling. The order must contain a statement that warns the owner of the dwelling that failure to timely make the required repairs may result in a determination by the public officer that the dwelling is unfit for human habitation under subdivision (4) of this section.

b. If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish the dwelling. However, notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the dwelling is located in a historic district and the historic district commission determines, after an administrative hearing as provided by ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of a historic district, and the dwelling has not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed consistent with G.S. 160D-949.

**(4)** That if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or improve, or to vacate and close the dwelling, the public officer may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Provided, however, that no public officer shall be authorized to cause a dwelling to be repaired, altered, improved, or vacated and closed unless the governing board shall have adopted an ordinance or shall have passed a resolution ordering the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this Article with respect to the particular property or properties that the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation. The property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner or owners in the grantor index.

**(5)** That if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the public officer may cause the dwelling to be removed or demolished. Provided, however, that no public officer shall be authorized to cause a dwelling to be removed or demolished unless the governing board shall have adopted an ordinance ordering the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this Article with respect to the particular property or properties that the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation and the owner shall have been given a reasonable opportunity to bring the dwelling into conformity with the housing code. The property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner or owners in the grantor index.

**(6)** That if any dwelling has been vacated and closed, and has remained vacated and closed for a period of one year pursuant to a lawful order of the public officer or an ordinance adopted by the governing board pursuant to subdivision (4) of this section, or after an order or proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the governing board shall have the power and authority to find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation, and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, and welfare of the local government in that such dwelling would continue to deteriorate, creating a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render unavailable the land, or significant portions thereof, which could be used for productive purposes, including production of affordable housing. Upon such finding, the governing board may, after the expiration of the one-year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following:

a. If the cost to repair the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.

b. If the cost to repair the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.

The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner or owners in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with the ordinance, the public officer shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance.

**(7)** That the amount of the cost of repairs, alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be as follows:

a. A lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessments provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.

b. If the real property upon which the cost was incurred is located within the corporate limits of the local government, the amount of the cost is also a lien on any other real property of the owner located within the corporate limits of the local government or within one mile thereof, except for the owner's primary residence. The additional lien provided in this sub-subdivision is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment.

c. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the public officer, the local government shall sell the materials of the dwelling and any personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition. Any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the local government to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.

**(8)** That if any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling, the public officer may file a civil action in the name of the local government to remove the occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying the dwelling. The clerk of superior court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date, and place not to exceed 10 days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served and if at the hearing the public officer produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the governing board pursuant to subdivision (4) of this section authorizing the public officer to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this subdivision unless the tenant was given notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the governing board has ordered the public officer to proceed to vacate the dwelling or to demolish the dwelling.

**(9)** That whenever a dwelling is to be vacated, closed, or demolished under subdivision (3) of this section, notice shall be given to every person who has filed a written request for such notice with the public officer providing the name and address of the person and requesting that the person be given notice whenever such action is contemplated. The notice shall be given by mailing to the address provided in the written request. A minimum of 45 days from the date of mailing of the notice shall be provided before the dwelling may be vacated, closed, or demolished, in order for any such person to negotiate with the owner for the repair or purchase of the dwelling. The public officer or a clerk designated by the public officer to maintain such records shall certify the mailing of the notice, which certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only a person who has requested notice may challenge the failure of the public officer to mail the notice, and the sole remedy for the failure to mail the notice shall be to require the public officer to wait 45 days after mailing the notice before demolishing the dwelling.

## 160D-1204: Heat Source Required

**(a)** The owner of every rental dwelling within the planning and development regulation jurisdiction of any local government shall provide either a central or electric heating system or adequate chimneys, flues, or gas vents for the installation of heating appliances and shall provide at least one heating appliance connected to the chimney, flue, or gas vent that is capable of heating at least one habitable room, other than the kitchen, in a dwelling unit to a minimum temperature of sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit (68 degrees F), measured three feet above the floor level, at an outside temperature of twenty degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees F) or above.

**(b)** No owner shall be required to replace an existing heating system that meets the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. However, the owner of any dwelling with a heating system that meets the requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall keep such heating system in good and safe working condition. An owner whose dwelling heating system does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall install a heating system that meets the requirements of subsection (a) of this section and shall maintain that system in good and safe working condition.

**(c)** No portable kerosene heater shall be considered a permanent heat source for the purpose of this section. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of a portable kerosene heater as a supplemental heat source by the occupant of a single-family dwelling or of one dwelling unit in a two-family dwelling. An owner who has provided a heating system that meets the requirements of subsection (a) of this section is not liable for any damage to person or property caused by the occupant's use of a kerosene heater as a primary heat source.

**(d)** This section shall apply only to local governments having a population of two hundred thousand or more according to the latest federal decennial census.

**(e)** Nothing in this section shall diminish the rights of a tenant under a lease, statute, or the common law, nor prevent a city from establishing heating requirements that are more stringent than those set forth in this section.

## 160D-1205: Standards

Ordinances adopted by a local government pursuant to this Article may authorize the public officer to determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he or she finds that conditions exist in the dwelling that are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of the dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents of the local government's planning and development regulation jurisdiction. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; or uncleanliness. Ordinances adopted by a local government pursuant to this Article may also establish minimum standards of fitness.

## 160D-1206: Service of Complaints and Orders

**(a)** Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to an ordinance adopted under this Article shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail. When service is made by certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the certified mail is unclaimed or refused but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within 10 days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.

**(b)** If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if the owners are known but have refused to accept service by certified mail, and the public officer makes an affidavit to that effect, the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the local government's planning and development regulation jurisdiction at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under this section. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.

## 160D-1207: Periodic Inspections

**(a)** Inspection departments shall have no authority to enter upon and inspect premises for the existence of unsafe or unlawful conditions, except as provided in this section. An inspection department shall make periodic inspections only as it has reasonable cause to believe that unsafe or unlawful conditions may exist in a dwelling. However, when in the determination of the inspection department a safety hazard found in one dwelling unit of a multifamily building poses an immediate threat to the occupants of other dwelling units in the building, inspectors may examine the additional dwelling units that may be at risk from the identical hazard or hazards without a complaint regarding those dwelling units. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit periodic inspections in accordance with State fire prevention code or as otherwise required by State law. For the purposes of this section, reasonable cause includes, but is not limited to, the following:

(1) The landlord's or property owner's history of more than two verified violations of this Article within a rolling 12-month period.

(2) A complaint received of conditions that may violate this Article or a request for inspection by an occupant of the dwelling.

(3) Knowledge on the part of the inspector of unsafe conditions in the dwelling.

(4) A violation of this Article visible from the outside of the dwelling.

Inspections under this section shall be made without discrimination between types of buildings. Inspectors may enter on premises at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection upon presentation of proper credentials; provided, no owner, tenant, or other person in charge of a dwelling shall be required to give consent to inspection of the dwelling except as provided in this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit periodic inspections required by the State fire prevention code or as otherwise required by law.

**(b)** A local government may adopt a program of periodic inspections targeted within designated blighted areas as part of neighborhood revitalization efforts. The total area targeted for these inspections may not exceed one square mile or five percent (5%) of the area within the local government's planning and development regulation jurisdiction, whichever is greater. Targeted inspection areas shall reflect a revitalization strategy and be based upon conditions meeting the definition of a blighted area or blighted parcel as defined in G.S. 160A-503(2) and (2a), although a determination of the planning board is not required. Before initiating targeted periodic inspections under this subsection, the local government shall (i) provide written notice to property owners and residents of dwellings subject to the program that includes information about a legislative hearing on the proposed program, (ii) hold a legislative hearing on the proposed program, and (iii) have a plan to address the ability of low-income property owners to comply.

**(c)** A local government may not do any of the following:

(i) Require registration of rental property or obtain a permit for rental property, except for properties with four or more violations of this Article within a rolling 12-month period or with two or more violations within a rolling 30-day period, or properties identified as in the top ten percent (10%) of properties with the most crime or disorder problems as defined in local ordinance.

(ii) Require enrollment in a governmental program for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

(iii) Levy a special fee or tax on rental property in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) annually, unless expressly authorized by special legislation. A local government may impose fees or taxes only on properties identified as not complying with a local ordinance.

(iv) Make a violation of a rental registration requirement a criminal offense.

(v) Require a rental property owner to submit to inspection as a condition for connecting to or receiving water, sewer, or electrical utility service.

For the purposes of this subsection, a "verified violation" means one or more violations found at one time during a period of 72 hours in an individual dwelling unit and not corrected within 21 days from the date of the notice of violation. For violations that are repeated within 12 months, the local government may eliminate the opportunity for correction. A housing code violation that involves prohibited conduct by a tenant, and not the conduct of the landlord or property condition, is deemed corrected if the owner initiates summary ejectment proceedings against the tenant within 30 days from the date of the notice of the housing code violation.

**(d)** Properties that are identified in the top ten percent (10%) of properties with the most crime or disorder problems shall receive notification of the type of violations that will be counted, and shall have the opportunity to correct those violations. The local government and local law enforcement shall assist landlords in addressing the identified problems, including potentially assisting landlords by testifying in ejectment actions. If the local law enforcement agency declines to cooperate and assist the landlord, the conduct of the tenant will not be counted, and the property may not be included based upon that tenant conduct.

**(e)** Owners of individual rental dwelling units may appeal actions taken by a local government under this Article to the housing appeals board of the local government if one has been established, to the zoning board of adjustment if it is directed to operate as the housing appeals board, to the planning board if one has been created, or otherwise to the governing board. The board shall schedule a hearing, provide due notice to the parties, and decide the matter within a reasonable time. The owner may appear in person at the hearing or may be represented by an agent or by an attorney. The board may reverse, affirm in whole or in part, or modify the action taken by the local government.

## 160D-1208: Remedies

**(a)** An ordinance adopted by a local government pursuant to this Article may provide for the establishment of a housing appeals board, in accordance with G.S. 160D-305, or may designate the board of adjustment as the housing appeals board. The housing appeals board shall hear appeals from decisions of public officers as quasi-judicial matters. Appeals from decisions of the public officer may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board, or commission of the local government. Such appeals shall be taken within 10 days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and shall be taken by filing with the public officer and with the board a notice of appeal that specifies the grounds for appeal. The public officer shall forthwith transmit all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken to the board. When an appeal is from a decision of the public officer refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed by the board. When the appeal is from a decision of the public officer requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the conclusion of the hearing before the board, unless the officer certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with the officer, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the appellant) a suspension of the requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day's written notice to the officer, by the board or by a court of record.

**(b)** The housing appeals board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals, give due notice to the parties, and decide the matter within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought before it and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or determination that the public officer ought to have made, and to that end shall have the power of the public officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the public officer. The board may adapt ordinance application in order to prevent unnecessary hardship, preserving the spirit and purpose of the ordinance while ensuring public safety and substantial justice.

**(c)** Every decision of the housing appeals board shall be subject to review by the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for review by the superior court shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within 15 days after the decision of the board is filed.

**(d)** Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the public officer or a decision rendered by the housing appeals board may petition the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order or the decision of the board pending final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. 160D-1402 or as otherwise provided by law. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision. The court may issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause. Hearings shall be had by the court on the petition within 20 days and shall be given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter a final order or decree in the proceeding. No bond shall be required of the petitioner as a prerequisite for the granting of a temporary injunction under this subsection.

**(e)** Whenever a dwelling is found to be in violation of this Article or of any ordinance adopted hereunder or of any order of the public officer made pursuant to this Article or any ordinance adopted hereunder, the public officer or the housing appeals board may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use of any building; to restrain, correct, or abate the violation; to prevent the occupancy of the building; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the premises.

## 160D-1209: Compensation to Owners of Condemned Property

Nothing in this Article shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this State nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this State.

## 160D-1210: Additional Powers of Public Officer

An ordinance adopted by a local government pursuant to this Article may authorize the public officer to exercise powers necessary to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Article, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted:

(1) To investigate the dwelling conditions in the local government's planning and development regulation jurisdiction in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.

(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence.

(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations in a manner that will cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.

(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances.

(5) To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he or she may designate.

## 160D-1211: Administration of Ordinance

The governing board of any local government shall prepare annually an estimate of the expenses necessary for the equipment, personnel, and supplies required for the examination and inspection of dwellings in the local government's planning and development regulation jurisdiction and for the enforcement of this Article. The local government may appropriate and expend from its revenues such amounts as may be reasonably necessary for these purposes. The local government may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this Article.

## 160D-1212: Supplemental Nature of Article

Nothing in this Article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of any local government to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this Article shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law in carrying out the provisions of this Article.
